Vertical segregation and phylogenetic characterization of ammonia-oxidizing Archaea in a deep oligotrophic lake
Freshwater habitats have been identified as one of the largest reservoirs of archaeal genetic diversity, with specific lineages of ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) populations different from soils and seas.
The ecology and biology of lacustrine AOA is, however, poorly known.
In the present study, vertical changes in archaeal abundance by CARD-FISH, quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses and identity by clone libraries were correlated with environmental parameters in the deep glacial high-altitude Lake Redon.
The lake is located in the central Spanish Pyrenees where atmospheric depositions are the main source of reactive nitrogen.
Strong correlations were found between abundance of thaumarchaeotal 16S rRNA gene, archaeal amoA gene and nitrite concentrations, indicating an ammonium oxidation potential by these microorganisms.
The bacterial amoA gene was not detected.
Three depths with potential ammonia-oxidation activity were unveiled along the vertical gradient, (i) on the top of the lake in winter-spring (that is, the 0 oC slush layers above the ice-covered sheet), (ii) at the thermocline and (iii) the bottom waters in summer--autumn.
Overall, up to 90% of the 16S rRNA gene sequences matched Thaumarchaeota, mostly from both the Marine Group (MG) 1.1a (Nitrosoarchaeum-like) and the sister clade SAGMGC-1 (Nitrosotalea-like).
Clone-libraries analysis showed the two clades changed their relative abundances with water depth being higher in surface and lower in depth for SAGMGC-1 than for MG 1.1a, reflecting a vertical phylogenetic segregation.
Overall, the relative abundance and recurrent appearance of SAGMGC-1 suggests a significant environmental role of this clade in alpine lakes.
These results expand the set of ecological and thermal conditions where Thaumarchaeota are distributed, unveiling vertical positioning in the water column as a key factor to understand the ecology of different thaumarchaeotal clades in lacustrine environments.
